Once around, Gleaser 229.
So, Giza 229 is a faint red star just on
the border of the constellation of
Leapus, the hair. From my point of view,
that's below Orion in the winter sky. Of
course, I'm in Cambridge in the UK in
the northern hemisphere. So, if you're
in the south, it'll be the other way up.
Magnitude 8. So, you can't see it with
the naked eye. In fact, we can't see any
red dwarf stars with the naked eye, but
you will be able to find it with
binoculars or a small telescope using
the star map. Just star hop your way
along.
And it's one of the sun's near neighbors
at just under 19 light years away from
soul.
Physically, it's a red dwarf class M1.
The Mclass stars are known as red dwarfs
and that runs from the brightest at M0
through to M9. So class M1 is at the
upper brightness end.
It's 58% the mass of our sun. So getting
on for 2/3 of the mass and just 55% of
the radius. Quite big for a red dwarf.
Some of them are as small as 7 12% the
mass of the sun. and uh maybe 10%. That
sort of range, not uncommon.
And actually, this one's relatively
young. It's half the age of the sun,
just 2.5 billion years. And red dwarfs
have a reputation for a lot of flares.
But this one, it does have flares, but
they're relatively calmed down now.
After 2.5 billion years, these red dwarf
stars do seem to uh produce fewer
flares. The majority are in the first
few hundred million years of their
existence.
And the interesting thing about Gleer
229 is really the discovery of its
companion 229b.
In 19 94, astronomers from Caltech and
the John's Hopkins University used the
Palomar telescopes and detected a
companion which was then followed up a
year later by the Hubble Space
Telescope. And we have the two images on
the right hand side here. The Paloma
image showing that blob just at the limb
of the star there and Hubble showing a
rather better resolution picking it out
in more detail.
Now this is an object that is orbiting
around the main star in a period of 350
years. So what do we know about it?
Well, from these initial measurements
and trying to get spectra of the uh
surface from the light reflected from
the primary, we were able to determine
that there was methane in the
atmosphere.
And methane in the atmosphere is typical
of things like Jupiter, gas giant
planets, but you don't tend to find it
in the atmospheres, the outer layers of
stars. So this is not a star um and is
perhaps a giant planet
or more likely a brown dwarf and as a
brown dwarf this was one of the first
such objects to be discovered. Now,
brown dwarfs are objects between gas
giants and stars themselves. And we
class anything from 13 to 75 times the
mass of Jupiter as a brown dwarf.
And the difference between a giant
planet and a brown dwarf is that inside
these larger objects, the temperature
can get quite considerable in the core.
And if it reaches 1 million Kelvin,
that's not enough to kick off normal
hydrogen fusion, that would uh require
around 10 million. And if you kick off
normal hydrogen fusion, then you're a
star. And anything over 75 times the
mass of Jupiter will be able to do that
and would be a red dwarf star at that
point.
But at a million Kelvin
you can do another nuclear reaction
which is to take dutyium the nucleus of
heavy hydrogen with one proton and one
neutron and smash it together with
ordinary hydrogen just protons and
create helium 3. That's the normal
second stage reaction that occurs in the
proton proton chain that turns hydrogen
to helium.
But although you can't do the first
stage, the proton plus proton reaction
to make dutyium, if you start with any
dutyium that you can fuse it, that
second step is actually easier to carry
out requiring a lower temperature.
The problem is that dutyium is very
rare. There are only a few hundred parts
per million of dutyium around in typical
astronomical objects and so you very
rapidly consume it all turning the
dutyium into helium 3 and you run out of
fuel. So you get a pulse of heat in the
center of these objects after they've
formed and then that heat gradually
dissipates and they begin to cool.
So GZA 229B
enabled us to calculate from that 350ear
orbit and from the the radius of the
orbit. You can use Kepler's laws to
calculate the mass of the primary, but
you can't from that calculate the mass
of the brown dwarf in itself.
Estimates based on size, brightness,
thermal radiation, a whole series of
different methods concluded that it was
quite massive. And the estimate was 71.4
times the mass of Jupiter. Now, that's
near the upper end of the mass scale for
brown dwarfs, just about as heavy as
they can get. But curiously, the
temperature is only 950 Kelvin. And you
would expect a very large brown dwarf to
have perhaps heated up to 1,500,
2,000, even 2,500 Kelvin.
And so this suggests that either it's
very very old indeed and has consumed
all the dutyium and done all its nuclear
reactions and then cooled all the way
down to 950
or that we've got the mass wrong and
that the mass should be cooler.
Uh sorry, the mass should be less in
order for it to be this cooler
temperature.
So something doesn't seem to quite fit.
But recently the VT very large telescope
in fact four very large telescopes
working to together as an intererometer
were able to have a good look at what
was going on with 229b
and determined from the images they were
able to construct and from looking at
the radial velocity with the uh
spectrometer the shell spectrometer.
They were able to determine that we're
dealing with two objects 229
BA and 229B
B. And the uh radial velocity was able
to tell us that these two objects are in
orbit around each other as a binary
brown dwarf pair. A go round in a period
of 12 days just 0.04 04 astronomical
units apart. So, we haven't got an image
of these two separately yet. Uh, but I
think that'll become possible as
technology continues to improve. And
what we were able to determine from all
of this, from Kepler's laws again, that
we have two objects, one with 38 Jupiter
masses,
temperature 900 Kelvin, and one with
slightly less 34 Jupiter masses at 775.
Now, that makes sense of the mass
temperature relationship.
These objects being smaller will have
uh been able to carry out less fusion
and had less dutyium in the first place
and so have ended up at this cooler
temperature and we haven't got one
single 70s something mass uh Jupiter
mass object uh with a curiously low
temperature. So this makes sense of the
problem.
Now, in terms of planets rather than
brown dwarfs, there have been two
possible detections of planets around
the main star, Glezo 229
capital A. And these would be 229 A and
229 AC.
The first one being a super Neptune and
the second one being a super Earth. So,
I would have thought a super Neptune is
probably really better described as a
Saturn perhaps, but um we seem to use
the term super Neptune for these. I
guess it's because we don't want to
imply that they have rings if we don't
know that that's true. And for the super
Earth, again, slightly larger and
probably rocky planet bigger than Earth.
And it happens that this one is in the
habitable zone, not too close, not too
far away, just at the right sort of
temperature for a rocky planet to have
uh liquid water on its surface. And that
sounds fantastic, but as it says on the
screen, the most recent studies can't
reproduce this. So it looks like these
might not exist at all. and I await
further results really to find out
whether this interesting uh stellar
combination with a red dwarf and a pair
of brown dwarfs has any further
companions.
So that's it. That's the story of Giza
229 and its friends. I hope you've
enjoyed that and thanks very much for
listening.